An AI-Driven Automated Interview Platform with
Avatar-Based Candidate Assessment
Design, Implementation, and Evaluation
Shlok Abhishek
Independent Researcher
India
Email: shlokabhishek@example.com
Abstract—The rapid growth of remote hiring has created
demand for interview systems that scale without sacrificing
consistency or candidate experience. This paper presentsAI
Interview Platform, a web-based system that lets recruiting teams
run automated, asynchronous video interviews through a per-
sonalized AI avatar. The platform combines a React single-page
application with a serverless backend, and uses a large language
model (LLM) for question generation, response evaluation, and
candidate ranking, with a deterministic rule-based engine as a
fallback whenever the LLM is unavailable. A distinguishing fea-
ture is the ability to synthesize an interviewer avatar from an HR
professional’s photographs and voice, paired with text-to-speech
(TTS) and speech-to-text (STT) for a conversational interview
flow. The system also includes a lightweight, privacy-preserving
computer-vision heuristic that flags likely phone use during
recording. We describe the architecture, a five-dimension scoring
model (relevance, accuracy, confidence, keyword coverage, and
skill signal), and the graceful-degradation strategy that keeps
the platform operational under API outages or rate limits. We
report a functional and qualitative evaluation of the implemented
system and, because automated hiring tools now fall under active
legal and regulatory scrutiny (e.g., NYC Local Law 144, the
Illinois AI Video Interview Act, and the EU AI Act’s high-
risk classification of employment AI), we discuss the fairness,
transparency, and auditability requirements the platform would
need to satisfy before production deployment. We position this
as a systems and design contribution rather than a validated
hiring instrument, and we outline the empirical study needed to
establish predictive validity and demographic fairness prior to
real-world use.
Index Terms—Artificial Intelligence, Large Language Models,
Automated Interviewing, AI Avatar, Speech Processing, Candi-
date Assessment, Algorithmic Fairness, Human-Computer Inter-
action
I. INTRODUCTION
Traditional hiring processes depend heavily on human judg-
ment, which creates well-documented challenges around scala-
bility, consistency, and objectivity. As organizations grow, HR
teams are often overwhelmed by application volume, leading
to long hiring cycles, scheduling bottlenecks, and interviewer-
to-interviewer variability in scoring [1], [2]. Structured in-
terviews reduce some of this variability but remain labor-
intensive and difficult to standardize across many interviewers
and requisitions.
Advances in natural language processing (NLP) and large
language models (LLMs) have made it feasible to automate
large parts of the recruitment pipeline: generating context-
aware questions, evaluating open-ended responses semanti-
cally, and producing evidence-based scores. However, most
existing automated screening tools present candidates with
static forms or text-based chatbots, which strips away the
interpersonal cues that matter for assessing communication
and interpersonal skills, and can leave candidates feeling that
they are being evaluated by an opaque system rather than
engaged in a conversation.
This paper describesAI Interview Platform, a web system
that aims to preserve more of the human interview experience
while automating the surrounding workflow. An AI avatar,
trained from an interviewer’s photographs and voice samples,
delivers questions via TTS and video, and candidates respond
through the browser’s microphone and camera. The system
automates the interview lifecycle end to end: session creation,
question generation, candidate registration, response capture,
semantic scoring, and ranking.
At the same time, automated video-interview tools have
drawn substantial legal and civil-rights scrutiny in recent years.
Vendors such as HireVue faced a 2019 FTC complaint from
the Electronic Privacy Information Center (EPIC) alleging that
its facial-analysis scoring was unprovable and biased, and the
company removed facial analysis from its product in January
2021 [7]. More recently, the ACLU of Colorado filed an EEOC
and state civil-rights complaint on behalf of a deaf, Indigenous
former Intuit employee, alleging that an AI-scored video
interview penalized her communication style and that a request
for human-generated captioning as an accommodation was
denied [8], [9]. Separately, New York City’s Local Law 144
now requires employers using automated employment decision
tools to commission independent annual bias audits, publish
impact-ratio results, and give candidates advance notice [10],
Illinois has required disclosure and consent for AI-analyzed
video interviews since 2020 [11], and the EU AI Act classifies
employment-related AI systems as high-risk, subjecting them
to transparency, accuracy, and human-oversight obligations
[11]. This regulatory context directly shapes what a system
like ours must support — disclosure, auditability, and human
oversight — and we return to it in Section VII.
The primary contributions of this work are as follows.
•We design and implement a full-stack, serverless-ready
AI interview platform with separate interviewer and can-
didate portals.
•We propose a personalized AI avatar pipeline that com-
bines static imagery, optional video, and TTS to deliver
a more conversational interview experience than form- or
chatbot-based screening.
•We develop a dual-mode question-generation engine:
an LLM-driven mode that produces role- and resume-
tailored questions, and a deterministic rule-based mode
that keeps the system functional without external AI
connectivity.
•We present a five-dimension scoring methodology (rele-
vance, accuracy, confidence, keyword coverage, and skill
presence) with a matching rule-based fallback analyzer,
so that scoring degrades gracefully rather than failing
outright.
•We implement a client-side, privacy-preserving heuristic
for flagging likely unauthorized phone use during record-
ing, without transmitting camera frames to a server.
•We discuss, in light of current litigation and regulation
(Local Law 144, the Illinois AI Video Interview Act, the
EU AI Act), the auditing, disclosure, and accommodation
mechanisms that would be required before such a system
could be responsibly deployed in production hiring.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Sec-
tion II reviews related work on automated interviewing and on
the regulatory response to AI hiring tools. Section III describes
the system architecture. Section IV details the core methodol-
ogy. Section V presents implementation specifics. Section VI
reports our evaluation and its limitations. Section VII discusses
fairness and compliance requirements. Section VIII concludes
and outlines future work.
II. RELATEDWORK
A. Automated Interview Scoring
Early automated interview systems relied on structured
question banks and keyword matching [3]. These approaches
are inexpensive to run but cannot capture semantic nuance
or reward well-phrased answers that avoid the exact expected
keywords. Transformer-based language models, from BERT
to instruction-tuned GPT-family models, have since been ap-
plied to semantic similarity scoring and open-ended answer
evaluation [4], [5], enabling systems to move beyond literal
keyword overlap. Our platform builds on this line of work by
using an instruction-tuned LLM for both question generation
and holistic, multi-dimensional scoring, while retaining a
deterministic scorer as a fallback for reliability.
B. Avatars and Conversational Agents
Text-to-speech and computer-vision techniques have en-
abled digital humans and virtual agents in customer service,
training, and tutoring contexts [6]. The application of a
personalizedavatar, trained on a specific HR professional’s
likeness and voice, to the interview domain is comparatively
underexplored. Our system contributes to this space by pairing
avatar personalization with the automated, multi-dimensional
assessment pipeline described in Section IV.
C. Bias, Litigation, and Regulation of AI Hiring Tools
A growing body of evidence documents fairness failures
in commercial AI hiring tools. EPIC’s 2019 FTC complaint
against HireVue argued that facial-analysis-based scoring was
not scientifically validated and disproportionately disadvan-
taged candidates who did not match the system’s train-
ing distribution, including non-native English speakers and
candidates with disabilities; HireVue subsequently dropped
facial analysis in January 2021 [7]. The EEOC’s first AI-
discrimination settlement involved iTutorGroup, where auto-
mated screening software allegedly rejected applicants on the
basis of age [9]. In 2025, the ACLU of Colorado filed a
complaint against Intuit and HireVue alleging that an AI-
scored video interview relying on automated speech recog-
nition disadvantaged a deaf, Indigenous candidate whose ac-
commodation request was denied [8], [9]. These cases moti-
vate treating disclosure, human oversight, and accommodation
support as first-class design requirements rather than after-the-
fact policy add-ons, which is reflected in the platform’s design
(Section IV) and discussed further in Section VII.
On the regulatory side, Illinois has required employers to
disclose AI use, explain how it works, and obtain candidate
consent for AI-analyzed video interviews since 2020 [11].
NYC Local Law 144, in force since July 2023, requires an
independent annual bias audit of any automated employment
decision tool, publication of selection-rate and scoring-rate
impact ratios by race, ethnicity, and sex, and at least ten
business days of advance notice to candidates [10]. The EU
AI Act designates employment-related AI systems, including
CV-screening and interview-scoring software, as high-risk,
imposing conformity assessment, transparency, and human-
oversight duties on providers and deployers [11]. Any produc-
tion deployment of the platform described here would need to
be designed against these obligations from the outset.
III. SYSTEMARCHITECTURE
The platform follows a client-server architecture with a clear
separation of concerns, illustrated in Fig. 1. The frontend is
a React single-page application (SPA) optimized for modern
browsers. The backend consists of serverless functions and a
Node.js server that interface with an external LLM provider
and a document-oriented database for persistence.
A. Frontend Layer
The frontend is built with React 18 and Vite, styled with
TailwindCSS, and organized into two portals:
•Interviewer Portal: dashboard, avatar training, session
management, question creation, candidate tracking with
AI-derived scores and rankings, and configuration set-
tings.
•Candidate Portal: registration via unique links, the AI-
conducted interview experience, live transcription, and
progress tracking.
Architectural Overview
React SPA (Interviewer / Candidate Portals)
↕HTTP / JSON
Serverless API Layer (Vercel Functions)
↕
LLM Provider (OpenAI)andPersistence (MongoDB)
Local Fallback Analyzers (Rule-based)
Fig. 1. High-level system architecture. When the LLM provider is unreach-
able or rate-limited, requests are transparently served by the local fallback
analyzers instead of failing.
B. Backend Layer
The backend is implemented as serverless functions de-
ployed on Vercel, supplemented by a Node.js server for local
development. It exposes endpoints for session management,
candidate registration, question generation, resume analysis,
and response analysis, and mediates all LLM calls so that
API credentials remain server-side and are never exposed to
the browser.
C. Data Persistence
Session and candidate data can be persisted locally in the
browser via the Web Storage API, or in MongoDB for cross-
device consistency. This lets the platform run in offline or
single-device demo scenarios while remaining deployable at
production scale.
IV. METHODOLOGY
A. Personalized AI Avatar
HR professionals upload facial images and, optionally, a
short demo video. During interviews, the avatar renders the
interviewer’s image or video alongside TTS narration of each
question, with rate and pitch tuned toward natural-sounding
speech. Speech timing is synchronized with lightweight visual
cues (a scaling animation and an active-speaking indicator).
Candidates can replay questions, mute audio, and toggle sub-
titles, which is also relevant to the captioning-accommodation
concerns raised in Section VII.
B. Speech and Media Processing
The platform uses the Web Speech API for synthesis and
recognition. Candidate answers are captured with the Medi-
aRecorder API as WebM audio/video, with speech recognition
producing a live transcript for downstream analysis. The
pipeline supports camera/microphone toggling, pause/resume,
and automatic duration limits per question.
C. Question Generation
Question generation operates in two modes. In AI-assisted
mode, a structured prompt combining the job description and
optional resume text is sent to the LLM, which returns role-
specific questions with expected keywords, time limits, and
per-question weights. In deterministic mode, a local rule-
based generator extracts skills and project signals from the
job description and resume to construct comparable questions
without external connectivity. This dual-mode design guaran-
tees the system remains usable when the LLM provider is
unavailable.
D. Multi-Dimensional Response Scoring
Each answer is evaluated along five dimensions:
•Relevance (R): how directly the answer addresses the
question, computed from lexical overlap plus a response-
length adjustment.
•Accuracy (A): technical or practical correctness for
domain-specific questions, derived from keyword match-
ing combined with relevance.
•Confidence (C): clarity and assertiveness of the response,
inferred from linguistic confidence markers and length.
•Keyword coverage (K): the proportion of expected
concepts present in the answer.
•Skill presence (S): detection of competencies such as
communication, problem-solving, teamwork, leadership,
technical depth, and adaptability, via curated keyword
lexicons.
The overall per-question score is
Overall = min
 
100, wRR+w AA+w CC+w KK

·W,(1)
with weightsw R = 0.25,w A = 0.30,w C = 0.20,w K = 0.25,
andWa per-question importance factor set at question-
creation time.Sis reported alongside the numeric score as
a competency profile rather than folded into Eq. 1, since skill
presence is better presented qualitatively than compressed into
a single scalar. When the LLM is reachable, an instruction-
based prompt with a structured JSON schema produces cal-
ibratedR,A,C,Kvalues together with evidence-based
strengths and improvement notes; when it is not, the platform
transparently falls back to the deterministic scorer described
above. Algorithm 1 summarizes the response-scoring proce-
dure, including the fallback path.
E. Candidate Ranking
After all questions are answered, the platform aggregates
per-question scores into summary statistics (mean relevance,
accuracy, confidence, and overall score) and sorts candidates
by aggregate score to produce a ranked shortlist. We treat this
ranking as a decision-support signal for a human recruiter
rather than an autonomous accept/reject decision; see Sec-
tion VII.
F . Phone-Usage Detection
To support interview integrity, the platform implements a
lightweight client-side heuristic: downsampled camera frames
are analyzed via connected-component labeling to detect dark,
high-contrast rectangular regions with aspect ratios consistent
with a handheld phone. When such a region is detected during
active recording, a warning is surfaced to the candidate and
the event is logged through a callback for later review by a
Algorithm 1Response Scoring with Graceful Degradation
Require:candidate answera, questionqwith expected key-
wordsκ, weightW
1:scored←False
2:ifLLM service reachablethen
3:(R,A,C,K,notes)←LLMANALYZE(a,q,κ)
4:ifresponse well-formedthen
5:scored←True
6:end if
7:end if
8:ifnot scoredthen
9:R←LEXICALOVERLAP(a,q)
10:K←|κ∩terms(a)|/|κ|
11:A←f(K,R)
12:C←CONFIDENCEHEURISTIC(a)
13:notes←RULEBASEDFEEDBACK(a,κ)
14:end if
15:S←SKILLLEXICONMATCH(a)
16:Overall←min(100, w RR+w AA+w CC+w KK)·W
17:return(Overall,R,A,C,K,S,notes)
TABLE I
TECHNOLOGYSTACK
Layer Technology
UI Framework React 18, Vite 5
Styling TailwindCSS 3
Routing React Router 6
Icons / Charts Lucide React, Recharts
Speech Web Speech API (TTS/STT)
Media Capture MediaRecorder API
AI/LLM OpenAI (gpt-4o-mini)
Backend Node.js / Vercel Serverless
Database MongoDB
human. All processing runs in the browser, so raw camera
frames are never transmitted to the server; only the detection
event is recorded. We are explicit that this is a coarse heuristic,
not a certified proctoring solution (Section VI).
V. IMPLEMENTATION
The system is implemented with a JavaScript/TypeScript
toolchain, summarized in Table I.
A. Resilience and Graceful Degradation
Every AI-dependent feature is wrapped with a fallback
(Algorithm 1). If the LLM endpoint errors out or times
out, question generation reverts to the local generator and
response analysis reverts to the deterministic scorer. This keeps
the platform operational under network constraints, provider
outages, or rate limiting, at the cost of the semantic richness
the LLM path provides.
B. Privacy and Security
Video and audio are captured and processed client-side
wherever possible; the backend receives only text transcripts
and metadata needed for analysis, and the phone-detection
heuristic never uploads camera frames. LLM API credentials
are held server-side only. These choices reduce, but do not
by themselves guarantee, compliance with data-protection and
AI-hiring regulation; Section VII discusses what additional
controls a production deployment would need.
VI. EVALUATION
A. Functional Evaluation
We evaluated the platform against its functional require-
ments across both interviewer and candidate workflows. The
avatar guided candidates through multi-question sessions end
to end, and live transcription was usable in Chromium-based
browsers, where the Web Speech API is best supported.
Both question-generation modes (AI-assisted and determinis-
tic) produced coherent, role-relevant questions, and the fall-
back path activated correctly under simulated LLM outages,
confirming that the degradation strategy behaves as designed.
B. Scoring Behavior
The deterministic scorer produces reproducible outputs
across repeated runs on the same input, which is useful as
a stable baseline and as a fallback guarantee. The LLM-based
scorer produces richer, evidence-linked feedback but is non-
deterministic across runs by nature of the underlying model.
We have not yet conducted a controlled study comparing
either scorer’s outputs to human interviewer judgments; we
report this as a limitation rather than a validated capability.
Establishing predictive or concurrent validity against expert
human ratings, ideally with inter-rater reliability statistics (e.g.,
Cohen’sκor intraclass correlation) and a demographically
stratified sample, is necessary future work before the scoring
model can be treated as more than a decision-support aid.
C. Limitations
•Speech recognition variability.Recognition quality
varies by browser, performing best in Chrome and less
reliably in Safari and Firefox, which can systematically
disadvantage candidates on those browsers or with ac-
cents or speech patterns underrepresented in the underly-
ing recognition model’s training data [8].
•Semantic ceiling of the fallback scorer.The deter-
ministic analyzer cannot capture semantic nuance and
may under-score well-phrased answers that use synonyms
rather than the exact expected keywords.
•Phone-detection false positives/negatives.The
connected-component heuristic is a coarse approximation
and will misfire under varied lighting or camera angles;
it should be treated as a flag for human review, not an
automated integrity determination.
•No validated fairness or accuracy evaluation.We have
not yet run a bias audit of the kind required under NYC
Local Law 144 [10], nor a study of scoring parity across
protected groups. Given documented fairness failures in
comparable commercial tools [7]–[9], this is a prerequi-
site for production use, not an optional extension.
•Throughput constraints.Candidate volume and concur-
rency are bounded by third-party LLM API rate limits
and quotas.
VII. ETHICALCONSIDERATIONS ANDREGULATORY
ALIGNMENT
Because this platform automates a legally sensitive decision
process, we treat fairness and compliance as design require-
ments rather than a discussion appendix.
A. Disclosure and Consent
Following the approach required under the Illinois AI Video
Interview Act [11], candidates should be informed before the
interview that an AI avatar and automated scoring are in use,
given a plain-language explanation of what is measured, and
asked for consent; the platform’s session-creation flow is a
natural place to enforce this rather than leaving it to individual
deployers.
B. Accommodation Support
The captioning and subtitle toggles described in Section IV
are directly relevant to the accommodation failure alleged in
the Intuit/HireVue case [8], [9]: a deaf candidate’s request
for human-generated captioning was reportedly denied. A
production deployment should treat accommodation requests
(captioning, extended time, alternative response modalities) as
a first-class, auditable workflow rather than a manual exception
process.
C. Bias Auditing
NYC Local Law 144 requires an independent annual bias
audit computing selection-rate and scoring-rate impact ra-
tios across race, ethnicity, and sex, benchmarked against the
EEOC’s four-fifths rule, with results published [10]. The
platform’s structured scoring output (Section IV) is well suited
to this kind of audit because per-dimension scores are logged
individually, but the audit itself has not yet been performed and
must precede any production use in a covered jurisdiction.
D. Human Oversight
Consistent with the EU AI Act’s treatment of employment
AI as high-risk [11], we position the platform’s ranking output
as decision support for a human recruiter, not an autonomous
accept/reject mechanism, and recommend that any deployment
keep a human in the loop for final decisions, particularly for
candidates flagged by the phone-detection heuristic.
VIII. CONCLUSION ANDFUTUREWORK
We presented an AI-driven automated interview platform
combining a personalized AI avatar, real-time speech process-
ing, LLM-based question generation, and a five-dimension
candidate scoring model with a deterministic fallback for
resilience. The system demonstrates a feasible architecture
for scalable, engaging asynchronous interviewing, but we are
explicit that it is currently a systems and design contribution:
we have not yet validated scoring accuracy against human
judgment, nor audited it for demographic bias, and both are
necessary before any production hiring use, particularly given
documented fairness and accommodation failures in compara-
ble commercial tools [7]–[9] and the regulatory obligations
now in force in jurisdictions such as New York City and
Illinois and under the EU AI Act [10], [11].
Future work will proceed along three tracks. First, a human-
subjects study comparing platform scores to blinded expert-
interviewer ratings, with inter-rater reliability statistics and
a demographically stratified candidate sample, to establish
predictive validity. Second, a formal bias audit computing
selection-rate and scoring-rate impact ratios across protected
groups, following the NYC Local Law 144 methodology, prior
to any production deployment. Third, technical improvements:
speaker diarization and prosodic/emotion analysis to enrich
soft-skill assessment (evaluated for fairness impact before
adoption), a trained object-detection model to replace the
current phone-detection heuristic, and multimodal fusion of
video, audio, and transcript signals for a more holistic and
better-calibrated candidate evaluation.
REFERENCES
[1] P. Cappelli, “Your approach to hiring is all wrong,”Harvard Business
Review, vol. 97, no. 3, pp. 48–58, 2019.
[2] J. M. Levashina, C. J. Hartwell, F. P. Morgeson, and M. A. Campion,
“The structured employment interview: Narrative and quantitative review
of the research literature,”Personnel Psychology, vol. 67, no. 1, pp. 241–
293, 2014.
[3] J. Salgado and S. Moscoso, “Validity of structured interviews,” inThe
SAGE Handbook of Personnel Selection and Assessment, 2012, pp. 287–
303.
[4] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-training
of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” inProc.
NAACL-HLT, 2019, pp. 4171–4186.
[5] OpenAI, “GPT-4 technical report,”arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774,
2023.
[6] K. R. Sridhar and S. Narayanan, “Beyond perceptual thresholds: Speech
synthesis and virtual agents,”IEEE Transactions on Affective Comput-
ing, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 1–14, 2020.
[7] K. Harwell, “A face-scanning algorithm increasingly decides whether
you deserve the job,”The Washington Post, Nov. 2019; Electronic
Privacy Information Center, “EPIC complaint to the FTCin reHireVue,”
Nov. 2019.
[8] ACLU of Colorado, complaint filed with the U.S. Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission and the Colorado Civil Rights Division against
Intuit, Inc. and HireVue, Inc., Mar. 2025.
[9] HR Dive and Bloomberg Law staff reporting on EEOC enforce-
ment actions involving AI hiring tools, including the iTutorGroup
age-discrimination settlement (2023) and the Intuit/HireVue disability-
discrimination complaint (2025), 2023–2025.
[10] New York City Council, “Local Law 144 of 2021: Automated Employ-
ment Decision Tools,” effective Jan. 1, 2023, enforced from Jul. 5, 2023;
NYC Department of Consumer and Worker Protection guidance.
[11] Illinois General Assembly, “Artificial Intelligence Video Interview Act,”
820 ILCS 42, effective 2020; European Parliament and Council, “Reg-
ulation (EU) 2024/1689 (Artificial Intelligence Act),” 2024, Annex III
classification of employment-related AI systems as high-risk.